# MEQuVA

Molecular Energy estimation with Quantum Variational Algorithm

## Files and Folders description

* ***docs***: contains documentation.

* ***notebooks***: contains jupyter notebooks, further file's description available in folder's readme.

* ***classic_simulations***: python scripts for HF, FCI, MP, CCSD with different basis 

* ***manual_VQE***: explicit VQE function, useful for hardware runs

* ***tapering***: script to search for symmetries 

* ***data***: simulation and measurement data

* ***example.py***: commented VQE example 

* ***requirements.txt***: list of installed packages used for the virtual python environment (python version: 3.8.5).

## Summary

The  idea  of  quantum  computers  was  first  introduced  by  Richard  Feynman  in  19821.   Since  then,in just 40 years, we have learned to exploit this new computational paradigm for problems ranging from nuclear physics to machine learning.  In this thesis we will use quantum computing methods to study the dissociation energy of the H+3 molecule. To  tackle  this  problem,  both  with  classical  and  quantum  computers,  we  must  solve  the  molecular  problem.   First,  we  separate  the  electronic  problem  from  the  nuclear  one  through  the  Born-Oppenheimer approximation:  this allows us to neglect the kinetic energy of nuclei and their movement.   To  describe  the  electronic  wave  functions,  which  belong  to  an  infinite  dimensional  space,it is necessary to choose a finite basis that has good approximation capabilities while keeping the computational complexity to the minimum.  There are several possible basis with different degrees of complexity:  starting from STO functions (Slater Type Orbitals), that are very complex from the computational point of view, up to the Gaussian basis and ”minimal basis” (functions that often lead to inaccurate results, but which are extremely simple and will therefore will be used for measurements on quantum computers).  There are also some more complex basis such as ”Pople’s basis”or correlated basis: both are much more effective than minimal basis, but difficult to use on quantum computers.  Finally, we need the Hartree-Fock approximation which allows to solve the electronic problem  without  considering  the  motion  of  every  electron  at  the  same  time,  but  by  introducing a  mean  field  which  greatly  simplifies  the  description.   This  approximation  does  not  consider  cor-relations between different electrons and therefore it is necessary to introduce corrective methods.Existing  classical  methods  must  balance  precision  and  computational  cost:  the  FCI  method(FullConfiguration Interaction) solves the system in an exact way although it has a high computational cost.  Other methods are introduced in order to reduce this cost such as MP (Møller-Plesset) or CC(Coupled Cluster) which introduce further approximations.At  this  point,  we  can  introduce  the  fundamental  elements  of  quantum  computing.   Instead  of classical bits, in quantum computers the units of information are constituted by qubits:  two-state quantum systems that can be superimposed in infinite combinations.  Operations on these qubits are performed by quantum gate which are the equivalents of boolean gates.  Most of these operations consider  a  single  qubit,  but  there  are  gates  operating  on  multiple  qubits:   for  example,  CNOT(Controlled NOT) which is needed to establish entangled systems that are fundamental to quantum computing.  A set of gates applied to a certain number of qubits is called a circuit.  The first step in tackling the electronic problem on quantum computers is to translate the fermionic system into a quantum circuit.  To do this,  different isomorphisms can be used,  the main ones being Jordan-Wigner, parity and Bravyi-Kitaev isomorphisms.Currently existing quantum computers (even those that can be accessed freely via IBMQ) have some fundamental limitations:  they have limited numbers of qubits and are also very noisy as they are subject to decoherence and other errors both in the application of gates either in measures or in the preparation of states.  Therefore, we can say that we are in the NISQ era (Noisy Intermediate-ScaleQuantum) where it is not yet possible to build noiseless quantum computers.  For this reason, is  essential  to  minimize  the  number  of  qubits  and  implement  errors  mitigation  techniques.   The VQE (Variational Quantum Eigensolver) is an algorithm designed for NISQ quantum computers that  exploits  the  variational  principle  to  find  the  minimum  energy  of  a  system.   It  is  a  hybrid algorithm that uses both classical and quantum processors:  it starts from a state (possibly obtained from the Hartree-Fock approximation),  that is varied through a specific variational form and the energy corresponding to the final state is calculated; a classical optimizer takes care of varying the parameters of the variational form with the aim of minimizing the energy.The central part of this thesis focuses on the application of VQE to the trihydrogen cationH+3. First,classical computations are applied in order to obtain reference results for quantum measurements.VQE is then used on quantum computer simulators obtaining results from noiseless simulations.  For simulations with noise, on the other hand, it is necessary to carry out a more in-depth study on the variational form to reduce the number of gates (main source of noise) and to better implement error mitigation techniques.  Finally, measurements are performed on a real quantum computer.The dissociation energy found with FCI and the most accurate basis (0.164±0.005EH) is perfectly compatible with the experimental tabulated value (0.161EH).  In quantum computing simulations,however,  it  was  necessary  to  adopt  a  minimal  basis  in  order  not  to  use  more  qubits  than  those available,  so  the  value  calculated  with  FCI  is:  0.145±0.005EH.   In  noise  simulations  the  value deviates  a  little  from  the  exact  result:   0.124±0.005EH.   Noise  simulations  represent  the  best execution for a real quantum computer, so the result (0.119±0.005EH) was expected to get even worse (although it is compatible with the simulated noise).Deviations  from  the  expected  value  indicate  that  VQE  is  an  algorithm  still  being  perfected.   In contemporary research various possible developments are being explored:  one of these, the ADAPT-VQE6, introduces a variational form dependent on the analyzed problem that allows to use a smaller number  of  qubits  (addressing  one  of  the  main  NISQ  problems).   The  main  goal  of  research  on quantum  computers  is  to  find  an  algorithm  capable  of  solving  a  problem  in  an  extremely  more efficient way than any solution on classic computers:  this is the quantum advantage (or quantum supremacy).  The most promising algorithms, in this sense, are VQE and its derivatives